# A long rambling post about my career history so far

### PhD

For my undergraduate at university I studied maths and physics. After finishing
I wasn't really sure what I wanted to do, expect that I had been enjoying
university so far. I had heard that blue-skies physics research tended to
payoff, so I thought of that as a path to high-impact (I hadn't come across EA
at this point). So: I went for a PhD. I chose my PhD for one good reason and one
bad reason.
  
The good one was that it would involve a lot of programming so even if an
academic career didn't work out I would have a good safety net. I had already
heard that academic careers were hard to get. At that point I had always
excelled without much effort so I didn't give it too much thought, but it turned
out to be prescient.
  
The bad reason was that I had this idea that all blue-skies research was as
likely to result in big payoffs as any other research, so I pretty much just
picked whatever sounded cool and interesting without thinking too much about
potential applications.
  
So I ended up in a nanoscience research program (super cool!) researching the
behaviours of nano-scale magnets (even cooler!) by doing computer simulations. I
quickly focused on the mathematics behind the simulations as my area of focus
and stayed there until I graduated.

The work was interesting and I met loads of great people, but in the end my
research didn't lead to any really interesting results. And even if it had:
realistically the best possible outcome of my work would have been incremental
improvements in the accuracy/performance of simulations of magnetic materials. I
guess the biggest real-world impact of this would have been slightly
better/cheaper hard disk drives. And then SSDs started to arrive (around the end
of my PhD) and completely belw HDDs out of the water so that wouldn't have had
any impact anyway.

To make things worse: from around 1 year in it became clear that I wasn't making
fast enough progress on the programming work to get the kind of results that I
wanted. So I started pushing myself hard to work long hours to try to get
results, everyone else in the lab was doing it so it would be fine right? Wrong.
After about 1.5 years of this I just completely burned out and found that I
didn't care anymore. I carried on to the end of my PhD just to see it through,
but I knew I couldn't carry on with that work.

In retrospect my lack of progress was because of 1. some terrible software
engineering decisions for the first year or two - I didn't validate carefully
enough and I only used regression tests so my code was often just computing the
wrong thing for months at a time, I was prototyping algorithms in C++ which took
forever, I didn't make nearly enough use of existing code. and 2. because I was
terrible at prioritisation - I spent far too much time re-implementing existing
algorithms, I didn't focus on the areas where we had a comparative advantage.


### Post PhD

I knew I couldn't continue with the work that I had been doing, but at this
point I still thought that maybe I could continue with an academic career in a
slightly different direction. Through my supervisors I got another couple of
small grants to do other computational mathematics work, which was again
interesting but didn't really lead anywhere. And I found that I was getting much
more interested in the programming aspect than the research aspect. So after
about 8 months of this I decided to become a software engineer instead.

Luckily the whole time I had been programming I had been trying to improve my
software skills - reading relentless, always thinking about how to do better.

I had been half-expecting this to happen so in between academic projects I had
been reading up on what I thought were important areas - I did courses in
machine learning and algorithms, I read textbooks on networking, cryptography
and operating systems, I did a bunch of open source projects. (Of course most of
these turned out to be unnecessary - companies want software engineers to be
able to understand problems and produce code to solve them, they don't want to
you waste time implementing complex cryptography or graph search algorithms when
you could just grab a library! The networking stuff was useful though becuase
everything interacts over networks and the details of networking affects how
applications work.)

So basically by this point my software engineering skills were in a much better
state than they had been around the start of my PhD.


### First software job

By this point I still hadn't heard of EA, so I think I was mostly evaluating
jobs primarily on whether they sounded cool and whether I could get them. I
applied for a few jobs: I think one in Google's algorithms research department,
one a startup doing something related to agent-based modelling that I can barely
remember, and one at Biosite, a startup doing fingerprint recognition. Biosite
replied immediately, scheduled an interview, and offered me a job within ~3
days. It seemed like a really great fit for me (C++, some scientific programming
but not 100% focused on it), the people I would be working with seemed great and
it was really convinient (a bike ride away from my current house!) so I
accepted. This turned out to be a good move because no one else even bothered to
reply to my application.

The work at Biosite turned out to be less about fingerprint recognition/ML and
more about building web applications for new features based on the core
fingerprint recognition, but that was fine I was having fun and they were
*paying me to do it*.

Working at Biosite taught me a lot, but I think the biggest thing was the idea
of prioritising work based on importance and difficulty. During my PhD I had
just assumed that I would implement every feature that I thought of! The shift
to focusing on the most important and fastest-to-implement things brought a huge
increase in my productivity.
  
In fact this idea of prioritising aggressively and cutting out the least
important work is so embedded into my mind now that it's hard for me to
understand how I was thinking before this.

It was also my first time working in a team, so I learned how to work with
people well (although I still don't think I was great at this by the end of
Biosite or even now). And obviously all of the core technologies for web
application work: databases, web servers, html, javascript, etc.

### Getting to Wave

A year or two into working at Biosite I came into contact with EA and started
thinking about what I wanted to do with the rest of my life. I had always wanted
to do things that helped people, and I had always been giving to charity, but EA
brought a whole new level of intensity to it which was exciting. So I looked at
a few of the jobs on 80,000 hours etc, but it seemed like the only high impact
careers involved either a) uprooting everything and moving to
Oxford/London/America and/or b) completely retraining into a new field. I wasn't
really interested in doing either of these so I shrugged my shoulders and
assumed I would just earn-to-give with a decent but not exceptional salary.

So then around 3.5 years into working at Biosite the work was starting to get
stale, I was sick of C++, suspecting that I was being underpaid and we'd
recently wasted time on products that no-one wanted. I wasn't really desperate
to leave (it was a comfortable job with people that I liked) but I wasn't
excited about staying anymore. So I started idly browsing job postings to see
what else was around. I think the first one that I saw was for some corporate
transportation scheduling startup, which seems really boring in retrospect but
it had much larger salary. So I applied for that, but then shortly after I was
browsing the EA newsletter and noticed the Wave job advert. I thought that I
would never get it, but maybe it would be worth trying anyway just in case/for
the experience!

So anyway after a couple of short but intense programming exercises and chatting
to some people at Wave I got a job offer! A month later after my notice had
expired I was off on a plane to Senegal to spend my first week there, and the
rest is history.

